---
title: High School Olympiads, Part 1
description: Selected miscellany of math olympiad problems I solved in high school.
date: '2024-6-1'
categories:
  - math
  - contests
published: false
---

<script>
</script>

Here are some math olympiad problems I solved in high school, sometimes with remarks and commentary. This is part one, I will publish more problems and solutions over time. There might be a lot of parts... These are mostly solved during 2021-2024, and I will somewhat publish problems in chronological order of when I solved them but not really.

## Problem 1, USAMTS 4/1/31

> A group of $100$ friends stands in a circle. Initially, one person has
> $2019$ mangoes, and no one else has mangoes. The friends split the
> mangoes according to the following rules:
> sharing: to share, a friend passes two mangoes to the left and one mango
> to the right. eating: the mangoes must also be eaten and enjoyed.
> However, no friend wants to be selfish and eat too many mangoes. Every
> time a person eats a mango, they must also pass another mango to the
> right.
> A person may only share if they have at least three mangoes, and they
> may only eat if they have at least two mangoes. The friends continue
> sharing and eating, until so many mangoes have been eaten that no one is
> able to share or eat anymore. Show that there are exactly eight people
> stuck with mangoes, which can no longer be shared or eaten.
> 
> --USAMTS 4/1/31

### Solution 1

Index the friends from 0 to 99 clockwise around the circle and let
$f_{m, i}$ denote the amount of mangoes the $i$th friend has after $m$
moves of sharing or eating. WLOG $f_{0, 0} = 2019$.

<blockquote class="border-l-4 border-border pl-4 my-6">
    Lemma

    For any nonnegative integer $m$, $\sum_{i = 0}^{99} 2^i f_{m, i} \equiv 2019 \pmod{2^{100} - 1}$.
</blockquote>

*Proof of Lemma.* We proceed by induction. The base case $m = 0$ is
trivial. Consider having friend $a \in \{0, 1, \dots, 99 \}$ share or
eat their mangoes on the $m$th move. If they share, (here in any term
$2^i f_{m, i}$ we always take $i$ modulo 100)

$$
2019 \equiv 2^{a - 1} f_{m - 1, a - 1} + 2^a f_{m - 1, a} + 2^{a + 1} f_{m - 1, a + 1}
$$

$$
\equiv 2^{a - 1} (f_{m, a - 1} + 2) + 2^a (f_{m, a} - 3) + 2^{a + 1} (f_{m, a + 1} + 1) \pmod{2^{100} - 1}
$$

If they eat, 

$$
2019 \equiv 2^a f_{m, a} + 2^{a + 1} f_{m, a + 1}
$$

$$
\equiv 2^a (f_{m, a} - 2) + 2^{a + 1} (f_{m, a + 1} + 1) \pmod{2^{100} - 1}
$$

We need the modulo $2^{100} - 1$ to account for boundary conditions when
$a \in \{0, 99\}$. And thus the lemma is true after move $m$. $\square$

Now, if no one is able to eat or share after move $n$, everyone must
have exactly one or zero mangoes.
$$
S = \sum_{i = 0}^{99} 2^i f_{n, i} \equiv 2019 \pmod{2^{100} - 1}
$$
Where $f_{n, i} \in \{0, 1\}$. Clearly then $S = 2019$. The base 2
repesentation of $2019$ contains 8 digit ones. Hence there must be
exactly eight people with mangoes as desired. $\blacksquare$

#### Remark 1
I remember spending a lot of time on this and was very satisfied with finding the idea.

## Problem 2, 1999 Romania TST P4

> Let $x_1, \dots, x_n > 0$ be positive reals satisfying $x_1 \dots x_n = 1$. Prove that
> $$
> \frac{1}{n - 1 + x_1} + \frac{1}{n - 1 + x_2} + \dots + \frac{1}{n - 1 + x_n} \le 1.
> $$
> --1999 Romania TST Problem 4

### Solution 2

$n = 1$ is trivial. Henceforth we assume $n \geq 2$. This looks like $\sum f(x_i)$ and ideal for Jensen/Karamata, but unfortunately we don't have $\sum x_i$ as a condition, but $\prod x_i$ instead. 

Let's force a sum condition by taking logarithms! Write $y_i = \ln(x_i)$ and $f(x) = \frac{1}{n - 1 + e^x}$. Then we wish to prove, subject to $\sum y_i = 0$,  
$$
\sum f(y_i) \leq 1
$$

Of course, we now consider the convexity of $f$. 
$$
f''(x) = (e^{2x} - (n - 1)e^x)/(e^x + n - 1)^3.
$$
$f$ has only one inflection point, namely $x = \ln(n - 1)$. We are in perfect condition to apply the $n - 1$ EV principle. We prove that there exist reals $z_1 = z_2 = \dots = z_{n - 1}$, $z_n$ also satisfying $\sum z_i = 0$ such that $\sum f(y_i) \le f(z_i)$. 

If one or less of $y_i$ lie in $(\ln(n - 1), \infty)$, we are done by Jensen's Inequality on the rest of $y_i$. Then assume for $k \geq 2$ and $y_i$ nonincreasing, exactly $y_1, y_2, \dots, y_k$ lie in $(\ln(n - 1), \infty)$, where $f$ is convex. Set $t_n = y_1 + y_2 + \dots + y_k - (k - 1)\ln(n - 1)$ and $t_1 = t_2 = \dots = t_{k - 1} = \ln(n - 1)$. Note $(t_n, t_1, t_2, \dots, t_{k - 1}) \succ (y_1, y_2, \dots, y_k)$ and by Karamata's Inequality,

$$
\sum_{i = 1}^k f(y_i) \leq f(t_n) + \sum_{i = 1}^{k - 1} f(t_i)
$$

Hence by Jensen's,
$$
\sum f(y_i) \leq f(t_n) + \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 1} f(t_i) \leq f(t_n) + (n - 1) f\left(\frac{\sum_{i = 1}^{n - 1} t_i}{n - 1}\right)
$$
So we are done setting $z_n$ accordingly.

Now without loss of generality, we may assume $y = y_1 = y_2 = \dots = y_{n - 1}$, and note $y_n = -(n - 1)y$.
It remains to prove 

$$
\frac{n - 1}{n - 1 + e^y} + \frac{1}{n - 1 + e^{-(n - 1)y}} \leq 1
$$
$$
\iff (n - 2) e^y + e^{-(n - 2)y} \geq n - 1
$$

Which is immediately obvious by Weighted Power Mean. $\blacksquare$


## Problem 3, ISL 2004 A5

> If $a$, $b$, $c$ are three positive real numbers such that
> $ab+bc+ca = 1$, prove that
> $$
> \sqrt[3]{ \frac{1}{a} + 6b} + \sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{b} + 6c} +
>   \sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{c} + 6a}
>     \le \frac{1}{abc}.
> $$
> --IMO Shortlist 2004 A5

### Solution 3
We wish to prove
$$
\sum_{cyc} abc\sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{a} + 6b} \leq 1
$$

$$
\iff \sum_{cyc} (\sqrt{a}bc) \left(\sqrt{a}\sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{a} + 6b} \right) \leq 1
$$

By Cauchy's,
$$
\sum_{cyc} (\sqrt{a}bc) \left(\sqrt{a}\sqrt[3]{\frac{1}{a} + 6b} \right) \leq \left (\sum_{cyc} ab^2c^2 \right) \left (\sum_{cyc} \sqrt[3]{a(1 + 6ab)^2} \right)
$$
By Holder's,
$$
\left(\sum_{cyc} ab^2c^2 \right) \left (\sum_{cyc} \sqrt[3]{a(1 + 6ab)^2} \right) \leq abc \sqrt[3]{\left(\sum_{cyc} a\right)\left(\sum_{cyc} 1 + 6ab \right)^2}
$$
It remains to prove $$(abc)^3(a + b + c) \leq \frac{1}{81}$$ Which is
clear by the identities $(abc)^2 \leq (\frac{ab + bc + ca}{3})^3$ and
$3abc(a + b + c) \leq (ab + bc + ca)^2$. $\blacksquare$

#### Remark 3
I remember being really tired but doing this in 10 minutes on my bed somehow. It's a good problem to test algebraic intuition, maybe kind of easy for A5.

## Problem 4, CMO 2018 P3

> Two positive integers $a$ and $b$ are *prime-related* if either $a/b$ or
> $b/a$ is prime. Find all positive integers $n$ with at least three
> divisors for which it's possible to arrange all the divisors of $n$ in a
> circle, so that any two adjacent divisors are prime-related.
> 
> --Canada MO 2018 Problem 3

### Solution 4
We claim that the solution set is all positive integers $n$ not a
perfect square or a prime power. Call a valid configuration of $n$ a
*circle expansion* of $n$, a tuple $(d_0, d_1, \dots d_m)$ going
clockwise around the circle where $d_i$ are the distinct divisors of $n$
and $\frac{d_{i + 1 \mod m + 1}}{d_i} \in \{p, \frac{1}{p}\}$ for all
$i \in \{0, 1, \dots, m\}$.

We first show that $n = p^a$ is not circle expandable for some prime $p$
and positive integer $a \geq 2$. Consider $1$ on the circle. WLOG $p$ is
adjacent to $1$ in the clockwise direction. Then note, $p^2$ must be
adjacent to $p$, and in general $p^k$ is adjacent to $p^{k - 1}$ in the
clockwise direction. However, that means $p^a$, after wrapping around
the circle, is adjacent to $1$. Contradiction. We also show that
$n = \prod_{i = 1}^k p_i^{a_i}$, for distinct primes $p_i$ and positive
integers $a_i$, fails when $2 \mid a_i$ for all $a_i$. Note that there
are an odd amount of divisors on the circle, each
$\prod_{i = 1}^k p_i^{b_i}$ for some distinct tuple of nonnegative
integers $(b_i)_{i = 1}^k$. Then consider $\sum_{i = 1}^k b_i$. Starting
at $1$, the sum is 0, and increases or decreases by 1 for each clockwise
adjacent divisor. Since there are an odd number of divisors, the divisor
adjacent to 1 counterclockwise must have an even $b_i$ sum, impossible
if it is a prime, contradiction.\
\
Now we prove that all $n$ with more than one prime divisor and not a
perfect square works. Then we can write $n = p^a \cdot k$, for some
prime $p$, odd integer $a$, and positive integer $k \geq 2$ such that
$p \nmid k$.

<blockquote class="border-l-4 border-border pl-4 my-6">
    Lemma

    Any positive integer $k \geq 2$ can be weak circle expanded, or have its
    divisors be written as a tuple $(d_0, d_1, \dots d_m)$ where
    $\frac{d_{i + 1 \mod m + 1}}{d_i} \in \{p, \frac{1}{p}\}$ for all
    $i \in \{0, 1, \dots, m - 1\}$.
</blockquote>

*Proof of Lemma.* Note we can weakly circle expand $q^b$ for prime $q$
and positive integer $b$ into $(1, q, q^2, \dots, q^b)$. Now assume we
can weakly circle expand $k$ and we prove that we can also weakly circle
expand $k q^b$ where $q \nmid k$, which will finish the proof by the
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. Consider a weak circle expansion
$A = (1, \dots)$ of $k$ and let $B = (\dots, 1)$ be $A$ reversed. Note
$A + qB + q^2 A + \dots + q^b X$ is a valid weak circle expansion, where
$+$ denotes tuple concatenation, multiplication denotes tuple scaling,
and $X$ is $A$ or $B$ when $b$ is even or odd, respectively. $\square$

Then weakly circle expand $k$ into $(1, \dots)$ and let $A = (\dots)$
denote the expansion without the 1 (note the expansion of $k$ contains
two or more divisors), let $B$ be $A$ reversed, and note that
$$
(1) + (p) + (p^2) + \dots + (p^a) + p^a A + p^{a - 1}B + p^{a - 2} A + \dots + p^0 B
$$
Is a valid circle expansion, where $+$ denotes tuple concatenation, and
multiplication denotes tuple scaling. $\blacksquare$

## Problem 5, China MO 2019 P1
> For real numbers $a,b,c,d,e \ge -1$ satisfying $a+b+c+d+e = 5$,
> determine the minimum and maximum possible values of
> $$
> S = (a+b)(b+c)(c+d)(d+e)(e+a)
> $$
> --China MO 2019 Problem 1

### Solution 5
The maximum is 288 and the minimum is $-512$, with equality at
$(-1, -1, -1, -1, 9)$ and $(-1, -1, -1, 4, 4)$ respectively. Let
$(x_1, x_2, x_3, x_4, x_5) = (a + b, c + d, e + a, b + c, d + e)$. The
conditions become $\sum x_i = 10$ and $x_i + x_{i + 1} \leq 6$
(cyclically), where $\prod x_i = S$. We can assume none of $x_i$ are
zero. First we prove that 
$$
S \leq 288
$$ 
We only need to consider the
cases where an even number of $x_i$ are negative. If it is zero,
$$
\prod x_i \leq \left (\frac{\sum x_i}{5} \right )^5 = 32
$$ 
If it is two, note that $x_i \geq -2$. There must be two cyclically consecutive
positive $x_i$, so that their sum is at most 6 and product thus at most
9. The last $x_i$ is clearly at most $8$, since
$x_i + \leq 6 - x_{i + 1} \leq 6 - (-2)$. Hence,
$$
\prod x_i \leq (-2)^2 \cdot 9 \cdot 8 = 288
$$
If four are negative,
the last one is at most 8, and $$\prod x_i \leq (-2)^4 \cdot 8 < 288$$
Now to prove the lower bound, we only consider when one or three of
$x_i$ are negative (five is impossible). If it is one, WLOG $x_1 < 0$,
$$
\prod x_i \geq (-2) \left (\prod_{i \not = 1} x_i \right ) \geq (-2) \left (\frac{\sum x_i - x_1}{4} \right )^4 \geq (-2)(3)^4 > -512
$$
If it is three, each of the other two $x_i$ are at most 8,
$$
\prod x_i \geq (-2)^3 (8)^2 = -512
$$ 
And we are done. $\blacksquare$

#### Remark 5
I remember someone saying ``least contrived chinese inequality:" on the AoPS thread. I cannot agree more.

## Problem 6, TSTST 2018 P8
> For which positive integers $b > 2$ do there exist infinitely many
> positive integers $n$ such that $n^2$ divides $b^n+1$?
> 
> --USA Team Selection Test Selection Test Problem 8

### Solution 6
The answer is all $b$ such $b + 1$ is not a power of 2. We first prove
that such $b$ work. We prove that if $n$ works, then there exists
odd prime $p \nmid n$ so that $pn$ works. By Zsigmondy's theorem, there exists odd prime $p$
such $\text{ord}_p(b) = 2n$. Note that $p \nmid n$ and $p \nmid b$. Now,
$$
b^{pn} + 1 \equiv (-1)^p + 1 \equiv 0 \pmod p
$$ 
And by lifting the
exponent lemma, 
$$
v_p(b^{pn} + 1) = v_p(b^n + 1) + v_p(p) \geq 2
$$
 So we
are done (note $b^{pn} + 1 \equiv 0 \pmod {n^2}$). We also easily have at least one such $n$, simply find an odd prime $p$ such $p \mid b + 1$, and note $v_p(b^p + 1) = v_p(b + 1) + 1 \geq 2$. Now we prove that
$b = 2^t - 1$ fail. Consider some $n > 1$ that works, and its smallest
prime factor $p$. Note $n$ must be odd, and $p > 2$ (otherwise
contradiction modulo 4).
$$
b^n + 1 \equiv 0 \pmod p \implies \text{ord}_p(b) \mid \gcd(2n, p - 1)
$$
Also, $\text{ord}_p(b) \nmid n$, so $\text{ord}_p(b) = 2$. So,
$$
(2^t - 1)^2 \equiv 1 \pmod p \iff 2^t(2^t - 2) \equiv 0 \pmod p
$$
$$
\iff 2^{t} - 1 \equiv b \equiv 1 \pmod p
$$ 
Which implies
$\text{ord}_p(b) = 1$, contradiction. $\blacksquare$