---
title: Borsuk's Conjecture
description: A write-up to this surprisingly accessible combinatorics problem.
date: '2025-08-17'
categories:
  - math
published: true
---

<script>
</script>

> Can every bounded subset $E$ of the space $\mathbb {R} ^{n}$ be partitioned into $(n + 1)$ sets, each of which has a smaller diameter than $E$?
> 
> --Borsuk's Conjecture

The first counterexample was shown in 1993 by Kahn and Kalai, decades after the problem was posed. Surprisingly, however, one only needs elementary undergraduate math to disprove the conjecture.

## Sets With Omitted Intersection Size

Define $[n] = \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$, and $\binom{[n]}{k}$ the set of subsets of $[n]$ with size $k$. We will prove the following statement:

<blockquote class="border-l-4 border-border pl-4 my-6">
    Omitted Intersection Lemma

    Let $p$ be a prime. If $A_1, A_2, \dots, A_m$ are distinct elements of $\binom{[4p]}{2p}$ such that
    $$
    |A_i \cup A_j| \not = p \quad \forall \quad 1 \leq i \not = j \leq m
    $$
    If $f(p)$ is the maximum $m$ possible, $f = \bigO(c^{4p})$ for some positive constant $c < 16$ independent of $p$.
</blockquote>

Consider a maximal construction for $m$. Note that for each $A_i$, there should be some $A_j = [4p] \setminus A_i$. Therefore, we can further impose the restriction $|A_i \cup A_j| \not = 0$. Our restriction is now $|A_i \cup A_j| \not = 0 \pmod{p}$, so we can work under $\mathbb{F}_p$. Consider the characteristic vector $1_i \in \mathbb{F}_p^{4p}$ of $A_i$, and define the polynomial $F : \mathbb{F}_p^{4p} \times \mathbb{F}_p^{4p} \to \mathbb{F}_p$ as follows:

$$
F(x, y) = \left (\sum_{i = 1}^{4p} x_i y_i \right)^{p - 1} - 1
$$

By Fermat's Little Theorem, $F(1_i, 1_j) \not = 0$ if and only if $i = j$. Now consider the $m \times m$ matrix $M$ with $(i, j)$ entry $F(1_i, 1_j)$. Since $M$ is diagonal, $\rank M = m$. However note that the number of monomials in the expansion of $F$ is $1 + {5p - 2 \choose p - 1}$ by Stars and Bars.

<blockquote class="border-l-4 border-border pl-4 my-6">
    Fact

    If for some $f$, $g$, each entry $(i, j)$ of a matrix is $f(i) g(j)$, then this matrix has rank $1$.
</blockquote>

Therefore, decomposing $M$ into a sum of $1 + {5p - 2 \choose p - 1}$ rank $1$ matrices as defined by the monomials, we have a bound on $m$:
$$
\rank M = m \leq 1 + {5p - 2 \choose p - 1} = \mathcal{O}\paren{\paren{\frac{5}{4} \cdot \sqrt[4]{5}}^{4p}}
$$

Using Stirling estimates. Of course, $\frac{5}{4} \cdot \sqrt[4]{5} < 2 < 16$. $\square$

**Fun exercise**: We can get a slightly better bound on $c$ by making use of the fact that $x_i, y_i \in \{0, 1\}$. Details will be left to the reader.

## A Graph Embedding

We define a graph $G_{4p}$ as follows: 
- The $\binom{4p}{2p}$ elements of $\binom{[4p]}{2p}$ are the vertices.
- There is an edge between two vertices if and only if their corresponding sets have intersection size $p$.

Now let's embed our graph into $\mathbb{R}^{{4p \choose 2}}$. For each vertex $v \in \binom{[4p]}{2p}$, we define its embedding $\varphi : V \to \mathbb{R}^{{4p \choose 2}}$ by associating each entry of $\varphi(v)$ with an unordered pair of elements from $[4p]$. This entry is zero unless exactly one element in the pair is in $v$ (the other would be in $[4p] \setminus v$), in which case the entry is $1$. 

We claim that with this embedding, the diameter is exactly between adjacent vertices. Consider two vertices $v, w$ with $|v \cap w| = k$.

$$
\text{dist}(\varphi(v), \varphi(w)) = \sqrt{\sum_{i = 1}^{{4p \choose 2}} (\varphi(v)_i  - \varphi(w)_i)^2} = \sqrt{\sum_{i = 1}^{{4p \choose 2}} \lvert \varphi(v)_i  - \varphi(w)_i \rvert}
$$

$\lvert \varphi(v)_i  - \varphi(w)_i \rvert = 1$ (and not zero) if and only if either

- One element of the pair is in $v \cap w$ and the other is in $v \setminus w$ or $w \setminus v$. 
- One element of the pair is in $[4p] \setminus (v \cup w)$ and the other is in $v \setminus w$ or $w \setminus v$.

Note that $v \cap w$, $v \setminus w$, $w \setminus v$, and $[4p] \setminus (v \cup w)$ are disjoint. Totally there are $4k(2p - k)$ such $i$ where $\lvert \varphi(v)_i  - \varphi(w)_i \rvert = 1$, therefore $\text{dist}(\varphi(v), \varphi(w)) = 2\sqrt{k(2p - k)}$, which is maximized at exactly $k = p$. $\square$

## Putting It Together

Our graph embedding is a bounded subset of $\mathbb{R}^n$, where $n = {4p \choose 2}$. Since the diameter is between any two adjacent vertices, each partition according to Borsuk's Conjecture is an independent set. 

Consider a sufficiently large $p$. By our Omitted Intersection Lemma, the independence number $\alpha$ of this graph is $\bigO(c^{4p})$. The chromatic number of the graph $\chi$ further satisfies $\chi \cdot \alpha \geq |V|$, so we can bound $\chi$:
$$
\chi = \Omega\left(C^{4p}\right) \quad \text{for some $C > 1$, by a Stirling estimate $|V| = \binom{4p}{2p} = \Theta\left(\frac{16^{4p}}{\sqrt{p}}\right)$}
$$

This is on the order of $\Omega(C^{\sqrt{n}})$ for some $C > 1$. Of course, one needs at least $\chi$ partitions, which clearly disproves the conjecture. Conside the growth rate we obtained, the conjecture was way off!

$\blacksquare$ 